Semestral/README.md, before:

[![university](https://img.shields.io/badge/university-Brno%20University%20of%20Technology-red.svg)](https://www.vutbr.cz/en/)

# Notes - semester project
Implementation of ALU (arithmetic logic unit)

#### Task:

  >Vlastní ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit) jednotka. Možnost výběru instrukcí a vstupních hodnot za chodu aplikace. Výstup na 7segmentovém displeji.

## Problem analysis
ALU (arithmetic logic unit) is a combinatorial logic unit witch do mathematical operations,  usually is used part of processor. All ALU must be implemented partially sequentially for reasons that would be huge. For study purposes, we also decided to implement it sequentially too.

#### Simple operations
Simple ALU should by able to do this instructions:[[1]]

\(C code is demonstration how to this instructions should work)

  - add - sum two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t sum(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A+B);
    }
  ```

  - sub - subtraction two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t sub(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A-B);
    }
  ```
  - and - binary and two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t and(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A&B);
    }
  ```
  - or - binary or two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t or(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A|B);
    }
  ```
  - slt - Compare two numbers *FOR YOURE IMPLEMENTATION IS NOT NECESSARY*
  ```c
    int8_t sum(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      if(A < B){
        return(1);
      }
      return(0);
    }
  ```

#### Control instructions

Our assignment of operations to control signals.

| **Instruction** | **Set of control bits** |
| :-: | :-: |
| **ADD** | 00 |
| **SUB** | 01 |
| **bin AND** | 10 |
| **bin OR** | 11 |


#### Representation of numbers in ALU
After many hours of study, we decide to use *2`s complement* code.
It brings many benefits. Sum of two signed numbers is easier and subtraction can again be converted to addition, by binary inverting second number and set carry_i to 1.

Let's see a picture[[4]]
![TEST_FULL_ADDRE](IMG/NbitAdder.gif)

#### OUTPUT into 7 segment display
For easier implementation, we used modules from previous LABs.
For this reason, the statement is NOT clear, because we display individual bytes as they are in output. for positive numbers is not so big problem but if we will want display negative member, output will be difficult to read.

**It is one of the problems that should be solved in the future**

#### OUTPUT into 5 LEDs
The next output is 5 LEDs, each of which signals the other outputs, in order Carry-out Output, Zero Output, Negative Output, Overflow Output and Parity bit.
(HIGH value is active)

  - Carry-out - sum of two numbers is bigger then max value of output number
  - Zero - output value from ALU is equal to 0
  - Negative - output value from ALU is negative
  - Overflow - output value from ALU is NOT true, value has been Overflow
  - Parity bit - get parity bit from output value (odd parity)

The most interesting of these is the test of Overflow[[5]]
![TEST_OVERFLOW](IMG/TEST_OVERFLOW.png)

## Implementation


## SIMULATIONS

#### Test of FULL ADDER block
![TEST_FULL_ADDRE](IMG/TEST_FULL_ADDER.png)
#### Test of 8bit adder with control input signal
![TEST_ADDER8BIT](IMG/TEST_ADDER8BIT.png)
#### Test of final ALU
![TEST_ALU](IMG/TEST_ALU.png)

## Resources
\[1] [https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf](https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf)

\[2] [http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html](http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html)

\[3] [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit)

\[4] [https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html](https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html)

\[5] [https://circuitverse.org/simulator](https://circuitverse.org/simulator)

[1]: https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf
[2]: http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit
[4]: https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html
[5]: https://circuitverse.org/simulator

Commit message:

add sequential module into project

Semestral/README.md, after:

[![university](https://img.shields.io/badge/university-Brno%20University%20of%20Technology-red.svg)](https://www.vutbr.cz/en/)

# Notes - semester project
Implementation of ALU (arithmetic logic unit)

#### Task:

  >Vlastní ALU (Arithmetic Logic Unit) jednotka. Možnost výběru instrukcí a vstupních hodnot za chodu aplikace. Výstup na 7segmentovém displeji.

## Problem analysis
ALU (arithmetic logic unit) is a combinatorial logic unit witch do mathematical operations,  usually is used part of processor. All ALU must be implemented partially sequentially for reasons that would be huge. For study purposes, we also decided to implement it sequentially too.

#### Simple operations
Simple ALU should by able to do this instructions:[[1]]

\(C code is demonstration how to this instructions should work)

  - add - sum two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t sum(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A+B);
    }
  ```

  - sub - subtraction two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t sub(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A-B);
    }
  ```
  - and - binary and two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t and(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A&B);
    }
  ```
  - or - binary or two numbers
  ```c
    int8_t or(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      return(A|B);
    }
  ```
  - slt - Compare two numbers *FOR YOURE IMPLEMENTATION IS NOT NECESSARY*
  ```c
    int8_t sum(int8_t A, int8_t B){
      if(A < B){
        return(1);
      }
      return(0);
    }
  ```

#### Control instructions

Our assignment of operations to control signals.

| **Instruction** | **Set of control bits** |
| :-: | :-: |
| **ADD** | 00 |
| **SUB** | 01 |
| **bin AND** | 10 |
| **bin OR** | 11 |


#### Representation of numbers in ALU
After many hours of study, we decide to use *2`s complement* code.
It brings many benefits. Sum of two signed numbers is easier and subtraction can again be converted to addition, by binary inverting second number and set carry_i to 1.

Let's see a picture[[4]]
![TEST_FULL_ADDRE](IMG/NbitAdder.gif)

#### OUTPUT into 7 segment display
For easier implementation, we used modules from previous LABs.
For this reason, the statement is NOT clear, because we display individual bytes as they are in output. for positive numbers is not so big problem but if we will want display negative member, output will be difficult to read.

**It is one of the problems that should be solved in the future**

#### OUTPUT into 5 LEDs
The next output is 5 LEDs, each of which signals the other outputs, in order Carry-out Output, Zero Output, Negative Output, Overflow Output and Parity bit.
(HIGH value is active)

  - Carry-out - sum of two numbers is bigger then max value of output number
  - Zero - output value from ALU is equal to 0
  - Negative - output value from ALU is negative
  - Overflow - output value from ALU is NOT true, value has been Overflow
  - Parity bit - get parity bit from output value (odd parity)

The most interesting of these is the test of Overflow[[5]]
![TEST_OVERFLOW](IMG/TEST_OVERFLOW.png)

## Sequential implementation

#### Possibility of use Sequential READER
Sequential READER can be placed in top.vhdl. It is able to read 3 bytes in a row (reads the rising_edge), Number_A, Number_B and operation (you can decide witch 2 bits will use)

#### TEST of Sequential READER
![TEST_FULL_ADDRE](IMG/TEST_READER.png)


## SIMULATIONS

#### Test of FULL ADDER block
![TEST_FULL_ADDRE](IMG/TEST_FULL_ADDER.png)
#### Test of 8bit adder with control input signal
![TEST_ADDER8BIT](IMG/TEST_ADDER8BIT.png)
#### Test of final ALU
![TEST_ALU](IMG/TEST_ALU.png)

## Resources
\[1] [https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf](https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf)

\[2] [http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html](http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html)

\[3] [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit)

\[4] [https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html](https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html)

\[5] [https://circuitverse.org/simulator](https://circuitverse.org/simulator)

[1]: https://cw.fel.cvut.cz/old/_media/courses/a0b36apo/lectures/02/a0b36apo_prednaska02_2014.pdf
[2]: http://www.mrc.uidaho.edu/mrc/people/jff/digital/MIPSir.html
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_logic_unit
[4]: https://minnie.tuhs.org/CompArch/Tutes/week02.html
[5]: https://circuitverse.org/simulator
